---
title: "The Perspective of Birds"
date: "2018-06-04"
description: "...and other distractions."
---
A few months ago I was sitting in a boring lecture, half-listening to boring people try to define Rawls’ boring theory of justice. Instead of listening, I chose to stare out the floor-to-ceiling single-pane window. It was raining outside. The wind was blowing the rain diagonally, cutting through the fog and clouds. Across the street from my building, there’s another building with a Romanesque statue of a woman on top. On top of her head stood a tiny bird, indifferent to the blustery storm stabbing water droplets into its face.

Instead of thinking about John Rawls, yet another old and white and male philosopher, I thought about what I thought this little bird was thinking; meanwhile, my lecturer asked the class what they thought about Rawls’ thoughts on justice. Lots of thinking, but no one looked very happy. I was busy giggling to myself while trying to picture the view of the street from the bird’s perspective. Eventually the bird flew off and I returned my focus to the lecturer in front of me. The lecture was small — about twelve people, lecturer included — so I’m certain the lecturer noticed that I wasn’t paying attention. But when I returned my gaze to his sleep-deprived, graduate-student eyes he smiled. I don’t think he wanted to be there either; we both would’ve rather been staring at that poor bird outside. With a massive rainstorm billowing around it, the bird sat atop the most precarious perch in sight. Meanwhile, we sat in a tiny room and talked about one of the (literally) thousands of things old, white, male philosophers have said. Everybody knows white guys are boring. What would a bird’s theory of justice be?

Equal distribution of seeds and worms. To each a perch; to all a nest.

What do you do when you’re bored? I try my best to distract myself in any way possible. With whatever's around me. Sometimes, when I'm feeling particularly imaginative or creative, I'll come up with ideas for a new short story or novel chapter. When I'm feeling lazy, I'll reach for the nearest television remote or my smartphone. Whatever it is, though, it's never one thing: sitting alone with my thoughts. I have to be writing, reading, talking, watching.

My parents used to tell me that only boring people get bored. When I was younger, I'd fill my days with video games. Without the constant stimulation of violence masquerading as 1s and 0s in the code running on my gaming console, I'd find myself lost in a "boring" world. The world isn't boring, though. It all just depends on your perspective. I've been thinking about that more and more recently. The weight of perspective.

The world seemed boring to me because I had become accustomed to an unnaturally rapid rate of stimulation. To my parents, the world was and always had been fascinating. My experiences had impacted my judgment of the world around me, but I hadn't noticed the importance my past experiences had on my judgments. I'd just never thought about it, and that happens all the time. Not just to me, but to everyone. We can't go around constantly thinking about our past experiences and the way they're impacting our current judgments. They do, though. Profoundly so. That's not exactly novel information; philosophers have emphasized the importance of experience with regard to knowledge since the foundation of Empiricism. Commonsense has told us a similar thing for about as long.

It isn't just our past experiences that impact our judgments, though. Whatever opinions we form are guided, crafted by our other opinions. In that way, then, it seems sensible to say that there are some foundational opinions we have which impact all the others. One such foundation is religion, of course. Other foundations may come from our parents, our teachers, our friends. But how did they form their opinions? Where did these foundations come from? The development of thought and the creation of opinions stretches back far earlier than we can remember, and will continue into the future long after we're gone. We inherit our opinions from those who preceded us, and we pass them on to the people who succeed us. In the meantime, though, when the opinion rests in our heads and is malleable, we craft it as we see fit. Consciously, via things like learning and writing, or unconsciously, via  the influence of other opinions bouncing around in our skulls.

That's why I think it's important to practice perspective-taking. That's why empathy is such a crucial aspect of our social order: without empathy, and without the desire to adopt the perspectives of others, we'd be stuck in our own heads. Without the intelligence of others to help us, without the emotions of others to guide us. Obviously, it's not exactly helpful for me to take on the perspective of birds. That is, in fact, just a particularly weird way to ignore a lecturer in a philosophy class. Thinking about what other people are thinking, though, will make you a better person. And it might even make you smarter, although that concept is revealed to be remarkably vague once you try to define it. It'll give you more opinions to work with. More "thinking tools" to wield, as some philosophers might say.
